# Preface.

GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, so called from the country of which he was a
native, was born about the year 1146, and belonged to one of the most
distinguished families in South Wales. Norman, or Anglo-Norman,
chieftain had established himself in that district, and left to his
family a name taken from the little island of Barri, on the coast of
Glamorganshire. William de Barri, the head of this family in the reign
of king Stephen, was lord of the princely castle of Manorbeer, in
Pembrokeshire, and became allied by marriage with one of the most
remarkable families in Wales. Rhys ap Tudor, prince of South Wales in
the reign of William Rufus, had a daughter named Nesta, celebrated for
her beauty, and for other accomplishments, who became the concubine of
king Henry I., and was subsequently married to Gerald de Windsor,
castellan of Pembroke. From this marriage sprung the illustrious
family of Fitzgerald. William de Barri, just mentioned, married
Angharad, the daughter of Gerald de Windsor and the princess Nesta,
whereby the Barris became related both to the powerful Norman family
of the Fitzgeralds, and to the princes of South Wales and the numerous
families of Welsh chieftains who claimed kindred with
them. Giraldus, the author of the historical treatises, of which we
now publish a translation, was the youngest of the sons of William de
Barri and Angharad ; and was no doubt named after his maternal
grandfather, the castellan of Pembroke. In one of the books translated
in the present volume, Giraldus relates how his cousins effected that
extraordinary series of exploits, the conquest of Ireland and it was
the unity of family of the conquerors, and their great connections in
Wales, which made them objects of jealousy, for their success, to king
Henry. The same feeling of jealousy was extended to Giraldus himself ;
and, according to his own statement, stood in the way of his
advancement to the bishopric of St. David's ; and this circumstance
will explain many sentiments expressed by him in various parts of
these writings.

Giraldus was born in the castle of Manorbeer, and, as he says,
displayed in his childhood a love for literature, and for the
ecclesiastical profession, which led his father to call him "his
little bishop." His education was entrusted to the care of his
mother's brother, David Fitzgerald, bishop of St. David's, with whom
he remained until he had reached his twertieth year ; and then he
repaired to Paris, and gained great distinction in that University. He
returned to England in 1172, and obtained ecclesiastical preferment ;
but his activity in correcting the abuses in the church gained him
many enemies. In 1176, the see of St. David's became vacant, and the
chapter chose Giraldus as their bishop ; but the king refused his
consent to his election, and Giraldus and the canons were compelled to
yield.  Peter de Leia, prior of Wenlock, was chosen in his place. He
returned to Paris, and continued his career in that celebrated
University, where he rose to great honours ; but he came home again in
1180, repaired to his archdeaconry of Brecknock, and was appointed
administrator of St. David's during a temporary absence of the
bishop. During the few years preceding, the first conquest of Ireland
had taken place. King Henry, visiting the borders of Wales in 1184,
became acquainted with Giraldus, and, admiring his earning, took him
to court. He employed him on several occasions in diplomatic
negociations with the Welsh, made aim one of his chaplains, appointed
him preceptor to his son, prince John, and, in 1185, sent him with the
young prince to Ireland, in the quality of secretary.

Giraldus was evidently a zealous, if a rather credulous, observer and
collector of facts. It was during this visit to Ireland that he
occupied himself diligently in collecting materials for a description
of that country, and remained there for that purpose some time after
the departure of prince John. The result was his "Topography of
Ireland," which he began to compose soon after his return to Wales, a
little after the Easter of 1186, and completed in 1187. Its completion
gave occasion for a remarkable display of the writer's vanity and love
of ostentation.  He recited his book, which was divided into three
parts, which he called by the then fashionable term of distinctions,
before a public audience of the university of Oxford on three
successive days ; and, to give more effect to this proceeding, he gave
on each day a sumptuous feast. The poor people of the town were
entertained on the first day; the doctors and students of greatest
distinction on the second; and on the third the other scholars and the
burghers and soldiers. Giraldus was evidently very proud of the
sensation he had made on these occasions for in one of his books (that
De Gestis Suis, lib. ii. c. 16), he declares that it was worthy of the
classic ages of the poets of antiquity, and that nothing like it had
ever been seen in England. Its effect appears to have been to increase
his celebrity.

In the latter part of this year news arrived of the capture of
Jerusalem by Saladin, and all Western Europe was thrown into a state
of great excitement. Preparations were made on every side for a new
crusade ; and Henry II., though too prudent a monarch to be led away
by the enthusiasm to which it gave rise, could not avoid seeming to
encourage it.  He accordingly proclaimed the crusade and Baldwin, ;
archbishop of Canterbury, was sent to preach it in Wales.  Giraldus
was appointed to accompany the archbishop, in which there was no doubt
a stroke of policy ; for our author was then known throughout Wales as
the champion of the rights and independence of the Welsh church
against the pretensions of the metropolitan see of Canterbury ; and it
was thought that, by joining him in the mission, the fears and
suspicions of all who might be inclined to look with distrust upon the
visit of the English metropolitan would be silenced. It is probable,
indeed, that the presence of Giraldus, the Welshman who had morally
been raised to the see of St. David's, did give favour in the eyes of
the Welsh to archbishop Baldwin's preaching ; although the vanity of
the archdeacon led him to believe that his own marvellous eloquence
was the chief element in their success. This expedition is the subject
of one of the most interesting of his books, the "Itinerary of Wales,"
which was compiled with the avowed intention of immortalizing the acts
of the archbishop, and especially of his companion, the
archdeacon.

In the year 1189, Giraldus accompanied Henry II. on his last
expedition into France, and he appears to have been present at that
king's death. The new king, Richard I., shewed the confidence he
placed in our writer, by sending him immediately to Wales, to persuade
his countrymen to abstain from revolt, and he appears to have
fulfilled his mission with success.  We find a further proof of the
king's consideration, in the circumstance, that, when Richard departed
for the Holy Land, he appointed Giraldus, who had obtained a
dispensation from the crusade, to be coadjutor with the bishop of Ely,
in the administration of the kingdom. Our author was now so confident
in his expectation of obtaining, through the king's favour, the high
ecclesiastical preferment to which he aspired, that he refused the
lesser bishoprics of Bangor, in 1190, and Landaff, in 1191, but his
hopes seem to have met with continued disappointment, until, at
length, he quitted the court, and, being prevented from going to
France by the breaking out of war between the two countries, he
retired to Lincoln, where he gave himself to his old literary
occupations. And he remained in this retirement several years. In
1198, Peter de Leia died, and the bishopric of St. David's thus again
became vacant.  Giraldus was elected by the chapter, and opposed by
the archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Waiter, who refused to accept the
nomination on the same grounds which had been previously alleged by
king Henry II., that it would be dangerous to the English supremacy to
appoint a Welshman to the metropolitan see of Wales. Meanwhile king
Richard died, and king John, whose favour Giraldus enjoyed, gave him
reason to expect that his election would now be confirmed but the king
yielded to the arguments of the archbishop, and, after a rather
obstinate struggle on the part of the canons of St. David's to sustain
their choice, the election of Giraldus was set aside, and the
bishopric of St. David's was finally conferred on Geoffrey de
Henelawe, in 1203. In the course of this dispute, in which an appeal
was made to the pope, Giraldus gave so much offence to king John, that
that monarch proclaimed him an enemy to the crown, accusing him of a
design to raise a rebellion among the Welsh, and seized upon his
lands. He, however, made his peace with the king, after the election
of Geoffrey de Henelawe; but, having resigned his archdeaconry in
favour of one of his nephews, and retaining only his two church
preferments of canon of Hereford, and rector of Chesterton, in
Oxfordshire, he retired finally from public life. The see of
St. David's was again vacant in 1215, and was offered to Giraldus, but
he was now unwilling to accept it. We know nothing of his history
during the rest of his life, but he appears to have died in the year
1223.

Such was Giraldus de Barri, or Cambrensis, the writer of the four
works translated in the present volume, and many others, most of which
have been preserved. In these writings he appears to us in the
character of what we may truly describe as an elegant scholar, deeply
learned in the learning of his day, and widely read in classical and
medieval literature. He was evidently a diligent collector of facts,
but he was at the same time a man of extraordinary credulity, as all
who read the following treatises will soon discover. Yet the
information he gives us is almost always curious, and we feel in every
instance that it is the bona fide result either of his own
observations, or of his own inquiries. In common with Walter Mapes,
and others of his contemporaries, he was fond of anecdote, and the
continual introduction of popular stories into his writings not only
render them extremely interesting, but give us very curious pictures
of life and manners in the twelfth century. Our readers will soon
detect another characteristic of Giraldus Cambrensis, which is not
less apparent than his credulity--I need hardly say I mean his
vanity. He seldom omits an opportunity of speaking of his own
writings, and almost always in a laudatory vein--of talking of his own
eloquence, of which he was evidently proud or of setting forth his own
deeds with the utmost degree of self-satisfaction.  He also affects
humour and wit but this consists too often in puns ; and jokes upon
words which tend rather to confuse than to amuse the reader. With all
these different qualities, Giraldus Cambrensis is one of the most
agreeable prose writers of the middle ages.

The four books contained in the present volume are those which may
more strictly be called the historical treatises of Giraldus
Cambrensis. The Topography of Ireland, as already stated, was
completed in the year 1187, and was dedicated to king Henry II. The
History of the Conquest of Ireland appears to have been commenced
immediately after the completion of the Topography, and was dedicated
to Richard, count of Poictiers, then the heir to the crown of England,
which he inherited some two years afterwards as Richard I. In the
preface to the description of Wales, he informs us that this history
was the labour of two years, so that he must have completed it just
before that prince ascended the throne. At a later period he published
a revised edition of this book, and dedicated it the king John.  The
Itinerary through Wales, which was intended to commemorate the mission
of archbishop Baldwin to preach the third crusade to the Welshmen, and
the part which Giraldus himself acted in it, was dedicated to
archbishop Langton, and therefore cannot have been completed before
the year 1207, when that prelate was elected to the see of
Canterbury. The Description of Wales, or the *Topographia Cambria*,
appears to have preceded, in the date of its composition, the
Itinerary, as the first edition was dedicated to Hugh, bishop of
Lincoln, who occupied that see from 1186 to 1203; but a second and
probably enlarged edition was subsequently published, and dedicated,
like the Itinerary, to archbishop Langton. In the account of his own
writings, given in a letter addressed to the chapter of Hereford,
Giraldus tells us, that in order to make his country better known, as
well as to occupy his leisure, and exercise his talents, he had drawn
"a map of the whole of Wales, with its lofty mountains and dense
forests, its principal lakes, rivers, and castles, many cathedral
churches and monasteries, especially those of the Cistercian order,"
and that this was executed in a small space, on a single leaf, but
perfectly distinct and clear. The loss of so singularly curious a
record is greatly to be regretted. It appears that Giraldus had
already imbibed the taste for writing topographies when he composed
that of Ireland, for in various passages in that and his other works
he announces his intention of writing similar works for Wales,
England, and Scotland.  One only of these plans he fulfilled, when he
published that of Wales, the extent and plan of which differ very
considerably from those of the Topography of Ireland. We have every
reason for believing that the Topographies of England and Scotland,
which appear to have been delayed until the close of his life, were
never written. It is certain that no such works are known to have
existed.

It only remains to add, that the translations of the Topography of
Ireland and the Vaticinal History of the Conquest are the work of
Thomas Forester, Esq., well known by many excellent translations of
our medieval chroniclers and historians, published in Bonn's
Antiquarian Library. They are the first complete translations of these
books that have ever appeared. The translations published by Sir
Richard Colt Hoare, in 1806, have been adopted for the Itinerary and
Description of Wales. All have been carefully revised on the original
texts by the editor. A large portion of the notes on the Topography of
Ireland are by the editor, while the rest, with nearly all those on
the history, are by the translator. Sir Richard Colt Hoare took the
Itinerary as a frame on which to build a large work on the local
history and antiquities of Wales, and it was neither possible nor
desirable to give the whole of his notes in the present volume. In
abridging them the editor has retained chiefly that part which related
to the history of the different places visited by Giraldus down to
the time of his visit, and to the description of scenery or
antiquarian remains. The words of Sir R. C. Hoare are retained, with
the exception of a few necessary alterations and corrections; and
wherever the writer speaks in the first person, the reader will
understand that Sir Richard alone is responsible for the statement or
opinion.

<p class="align-right">Thomas Wright</p>

# The Author's First Preface.

Forasmuch as in my Topography of Ireland I have described at large the
site of the island, its singularities, and those of sundry things
contained in it, the marvels in which nature has there indulged out of
her ordinary course, and the origin of the various races settled in it
from the earliest ages until these our own days, I have now
undertaken, at the earnest request of many persons of high rank, to
set forth in a separate volume the annals of events which have
occurred in our own days relating to the last and recent conquest of
Ireland. For if I have been able to give a tolerably clear account of
times long past, and of things which happened in ages so far preceding
our own, how much more exact will be my narrative of transactions
which have taken place under my own observation, of the greatest part
of which I have been an eye-witness, and which are so fresh in my
memory that I cannot have any doubt about them. The Topography treats
of localities and events connected with ancient times, the History
deals with the present.

But methinks I see some one turn up his nose, and, disgusted with my
book, hand it to another, or throw it aside, because the reader will
find all things in it plain, clear, and easy of apprehension. But let
him know that I have written chiefly for the use of the laity, and of
princes who have but little learning, and desire things to be related
in so simple and easy a style, that all may understand them. For we
may be permitted to use popular language when the acts of the people,
as well as of their superiors, are to be reduced to writing. Besides,
it has been my endeavour to compose all my works in a popular style,
easy of apprehension, however I may have added to it some ornament
from my own stores; and I have therefore entirely rejected the old and
dry method of writing used by some authors. And, inasmuch as new times
require new fashions, and the philosopher bids us follow the examples
of the old men in our lives, and of the younger men in our words, I
have earnestly aimed to adopt the mode of speech which is now in use,
and the modern style of eloquence. For since words only give
expression to what is in the mind, and man is endowed with the gift of
speech for the purpose of uttering his thoughts, what can be a greater
folly than to lock up and conceal things we wish to be clearly
understood, in a tissue of unintelligible phrases and intricate
sentences? To shew ourselves sciolists in a knowledge of our own,
shall we take pains so to write, that others may see without
comprehending, and hear without understanding? Is it not better, as
Seneca says, to be dumb, than to speak so as not to be understood? The
more, then, language is suited to the understanding, though framed
with a certain elegance of style, the more useful it will be, as well
as more suited to the tastes of men of letters. Wherefore the poet
says,

> Dixeris egregie notum si callida verbum
> Reddiderit junctura novum.

Inasmuch also as some malevolent person has made slanderous attacks on
my Topography, a work not to be despised, I have thought it worth my
while to introduce here a few words in its defence.1 The elegance of
its scholastic Style has obtained uniform praise from all quarters;
and though it is contrary to my detractor's nature to commend
anything, he is ashamed and afraid to cavil at my First and Third
Distinctions. But it is no easy matter to act a counterfeit part, and
my critic, not being able quite to change his natural disposition,
that he might at least do some mischief, and vent the malignity with
which he was

# Book I

## Chapter I: How Dermitius, Prince of Leinster, took refuge in England, and was restored to his dominions by the king of England.

Dermitius, the son of Murchard,10 and prince of Leinster, who ruled
over that fifth part of Ireland, possessed in our times the maritime
districts in the east of the island, separated only from Great Britain
by the sea which flowed between. His youth and inexperience in
government led him to become the oppressor of the nobility, and to
impose a cruel and intolerable tyranny on the chiefs of the land. This
brought him into trouble, and it was not the only one; for O'Roric,11
prince of Meath, having gone on an expedition into a distant quarter,
left his wife, the daughter of Omachlacherlin,12 in a certain island
of Meath during his absence; and she, who had long entertained a
passion for Dermitius, took advantage of the absence of her husband,
and allowed herself to be ravished, not against her will. As the
nature of women is fickle and given to change, she thus became the
prey of the spoiler by her own contrivance. For as Mark Anthony and
Troy are witnesses, almost all the greatest evils in the world have
arisen from women. King O'Roric being moved by this to great wrath,
but more for the shame than the loss he suffered, was fully bent on
revenge, and forthwith gathered the whole force of his own people and
the neighbouring tribes, calling besides to his aid Roderic, prince of
Connaught, then monarch of all Ireland.  The people of Leinster,
considering in what a strait their prince was, and seeing him beset on
every side by bands of enemies, began to call to mind their own
long-smothered grievances, and their chiefs leagued themselves with
the foes of Mac Murchard, and deserted him in his desperate fortunes.


## Chapter II: The return of Dermitius through Great Britain.

Dermitius, returning through Great Britain, loaded with honourable
gifts by the royal munificence, but encouraged more by hope for the
future than any aid he had yet obtained, reached at last the noble
town of Bristol. Here he sojourned for some time, making a liberal
expenditure, as on account of the ships which made frequent voyages
from Ireland to that port, he had opportunities of hearing the state
of affairs in his own country and among his people. During his stay he
caused the royal letters patent to be read several times in public,
and made liberal offers of pay and lands to many persons, but in
vain. At length, however, Richard, surnamed Strongbow,14 earl of
Strigul, the son of earl Gilbert, came and had a conference with him;
and after a prolonged treaty it was agreed between them that in the
ensuing spring the earl should lend him aid in recovering his
territories, Dermitius solemnly promising to give him his eldest
daughter for wife, with the succession to his kingdom. This treaty
having been duly concluded, Dermitius, inflamed with the natural
desire, which is so universal, of seeing his native land, lost no time
in journeying to St. David's, in South Wales. The passage from hence
to Leinster, by sea, may be accomplished in one day's sailing, and the
distance is so short that one coast may be seen from the other.  At
that time, Rhys-ap-Gryffith was prince of that country, under fealty
to the king, and David the second was bishop of St. David's; both of
whom treated the unfortunate exile with great kindness.
